docs/FAQ/orcfax_architecture.md, before:

---
id: orcfax_architecture
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /orcfax-architecture
---

# Orcfax architecture

## 1. What are the basic entities in the Orcfax platform?

How will data be gathered and published for the free Mainnet price feeds coming in Q2 2023?

![Orcfax federated architecture](/img/OrcfaxFederatedMainnetFeeds-ComponentDiagram-v1.jpg)

## 2. What advantages does Orcfax have over competition?

We believe that Orcfax offers several advantages over other oracle solutions. For one, the Cardano Open Oracle Protocol, which we developed with the help of [mlabs](https://mlabs.city/), is an elegant solution to oracle publication on Cardano and promotes a financial sustainability model. 

There are many other differences on top of that, especially on how we source and validate data as well as our focus on archiving authentic audit trails of all the data and metadata generated by a fact publication workflow[^1].

## 3. Where can I find out more about the Orcfax Testnet & how can I participate?

We haven't started yet but we will open our testnet to participants in Q2. The goal is to keep hardware requirements and technical know-how to a minimum in order to ensure widespread implementation and a larger network of Orcfax nodes. Our team is currently developing a strategy for deploying our Orcfax data collection and validation nodes as certified binaries which will make install and updates more efficient.

We also have plans for a “plug-and-play” preload and hardware package which we hope to release in 2024. These devices would come with upgradeable Orcfax node software pre-installed.

For those interested in this next exciting step for Orcfax and the Cardano community, please stay tuned here. We will give plenty of notice about our Incentivized Testnet here in Discord and will open a channel for participants when at launch.

## 4. Which projects has Orcfax partnered with?

We are working closely with the technical and managerial teams of several projects to integrate our Orcfax feeds with exciting and innovative products. Keep an eye on our socials for more formal announcements soon.

## 5. Where can I find the Orcfax team page?

At any one time, the core Orcfax team includes 5-10 staff and contractors. We believe a truly decentralized and permissionless project shouldn't be evaluated based on a very long team list. We've seen enough of that without it being a true indicator of project quality/status. The running code and its open-source codebase, along with its immutable features should be what is getting evaluated. For now, our founder and Peter Van Garderen is the human face behind Orcfax. He has the proven professional qualifications to achieve our project objectives. This includes making Peter obsolete and ensuring Orcfax runs as a fully autonomous network governed by a fully Decentralized Autonomous Organization.

## 6. Will Orcfax be governed by a DAO?

The Orcfax team is committed to radical decentralization and has structured the project accordingly, with the explicit intention of ensuring a 100% hand-off of governance and all aspects of the project to a DAO. 

The Orcfax team will continue to actively engage in Cardano community governance dialogues and model good project behavior in our progression towards full decentralization. Our team shares the personal and professional philosophy that, in the end, our primary objective in this movement is to decentralize power. The Orcfax oracle is just one piece of necessary plumbing infrastructure to facilitate that progression. 

With that said, the decentralization of a project, its community, and technology stack-- especially one as sophisticated as the Orcfax oracle platform-- is not a simple feat and nearly impossible to do correctly from day one. Therefore, we are on a path of gradual decentralization. We will continue to participate in Cardano community discussions about governance to develop our long-game roadmap and milestones towards 100% decentralized, autonomous governance. The likeliest and earliest time for that to happen is by year three, with five years being our maximum threshold deadline for this switch.

## 7. How long has this project been in development?

We have been working on the Orcfax solution since Fall of 2021.


[^1]: Additional information can be found in our project [Overview](https://docs.orcfax.io/overview). Please also check our [Prospectus](https://orcfax.io/assets/Orcfax-ISPO-Prospectus--March15-2023.pdf) To see how we are separating ourselves from other oracle solutions.

Commit message:

explanation for entities diagram and upload of pdf

docs/FAQ/orcfax_architecture.md, after:

---
id: orcfax_architecture
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /orcfax-architecture
---

# Orcfax architecture

## 1. What are the basic entities in the Orcfax platform?

How will data be gathered and published for the free Mainnet price feeds coming in Q2 2023?

![Orcfax federated architecture](/img/OrcfaxFederatedMainnetFeeds-ComponentDiagram-v1.jpg)

The above is a working draft document. The Orcfax team is sharing it here because our team practices a radically open software development philosophy. Over the next 12 months we are going to launch the world's most sophisticated and decentralized fact publication and archiving system. We want to model both software engineering and open source software best practices to ensure we're building sound civil infrastructure. We believe that this means having an open dialogue around requirements, design, features, priorities, etc. Because more eyeballs mean safer, better code— because not all designs work out. in fact, we anticipate that this diagram will go through several iterations before it accurately reflects the complex reality of the Orcfax system, and that's a good thing. What's needed on the journey between here and there is an open and transparent change management system which ensures all revisions are traceable and auditable.

## 2. What advantages does Orcfax have over competition?

We believe that Orcfax offers several advantages over other oracle solutions. For one, the Cardano Open Oracle Protocol, which we developed with the help of [mlabs](https://mlabs.city/), is an elegant solution to oracle publication on Cardano and promotes a financial sustainability model. 

There are many other differences on top of that, especially on how we source and validate data as well as our focus on archiving authentic audit trails of all the data and metadata generated by a fact publication workflow[^1].

## 3. Where can I find out more about the Orcfax Testnet & how can I participate?

We haven't started yet but we will open our testnet to participants in Q2. The goal is to keep hardware requirements and technical know-how to a minimum in order to ensure widespread implementation and a larger network of Orcfax nodes. Our team is currently developing a strategy for deploying our Orcfax data collection and validation nodes as certified binaries which will make install and updates more efficient.

We also have plans for a “plug-and-play” preload and hardware package which we hope to release in 2024. These devices would come with upgradeable Orcfax node software pre-installed.

For those interested in this next exciting step for Orcfax and the Cardano community, please stay tuned here. We will give plenty of notice about our Incentivized Testnet here in Discord and will open a channel for participants when at launch.

## 4. Which projects has Orcfax partnered with?

We are working closely with the technical and managerial teams of several projects to integrate our Orcfax feeds with exciting and innovative products. Keep an eye on our socials for more formal announcements soon.

## 5. Where can I find the Orcfax team page?

At any one time, the core Orcfax team includes 5-10 staff and contractors. We believe a truly decentralized and permissionless project shouldn't be evaluated based on a very long team list. We've seen enough of that without it being a true indicator of project quality/status. The running code and its open-source codebase, along with its immutable features should be what is getting evaluated. For now, our founder and Peter Van Garderen is the human face behind Orcfax. He has the proven professional qualifications to achieve our project objectives. This includes making Peter obsolete and ensuring Orcfax runs as a fully autonomous network governed by a fully Decentralized Autonomous Organization.

## 6. Will Orcfax be governed by a DAO?

The Orcfax team is committed to radical decentralization and has structured the project accordingly, with the explicit intention of ensuring a 100% hand-off of governance and all aspects of the project to a DAO. 

The Orcfax team will continue to actively engage in Cardano community governance dialogues and model good project behavior in our progression towards full decentralization. Our team shares the personal and professional philosophy that, in the end, our primary objective in this movement is to decentralize power. The Orcfax oracle is just one piece of necessary plumbing infrastructure to facilitate that progression. 

With that said, the decentralization of a project, its community, and technology stack-- especially one as sophisticated as the Orcfax oracle platform-- is not a simple feat and nearly impossible to do correctly from day one. Therefore, we are on a path of gradual decentralization. We will continue to participate in Cardano community discussions about governance to develop our long-game roadmap and milestones towards 100% decentralized, autonomous governance. The likeliest and earliest time for that to happen is by year three, with five years being our maximum threshold deadline for this switch.

## 7. How long has this project been in development?

We have been working on the Orcfax solution since Fall of 2021.


[^1]: Additional information can be found in our project [Overview](https://docs.orcfax.io/overview). Please also check our [Prospectus](https://orcfax.io/assets/Orcfax-ISPO-Prospectus--March15-2023.pdf) To see how we are separating ourselves from other oracle solutions.
