---
id: Auditability
sidebar_position: 6
slug: /auditability
---

## Standards-compliant audit logs
Can oracle solutions be trusted if they cannot, or will not, demonstrate how
their source data was collected and validated? We at Orcfax strongly believe
that they should not be.

As a response to this question, Orcfax generates standards-compliant archival
packages that are made available permissionlessly so that anybody has the
ability to audit the flow of Orcfax data collection, validation, and
publication.

To demonstrate the audit-enabling function and re-usability of these archival
packages, while further simplifying the auditing process for users, Orcfax
launched its [Orcfax Explorer](https://explorer.orcfax.io/); this tool provides
a user friendly dashboard which enables users to quickly and easily navigate all
data published by Orcfax, along with complete documentation for all processes
leading to publication. This product brings additional value to the Orcfax
solution by giving users the ability to freely search for, and review, all Fact
Statements published by Orcfax. The Explorer does this through purposeful
user-centered design decisions which have prioritized accessibility and ease of
use for a dynamic and diverse user group.

Click on the link below to view a walkthrough of the Orcfax Explorer!
[![Explorer walkthrough](https://img.youtube.com/vi/MVLOBT58PlA/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVLOBT58PlA)

## Future value
The archival packages created by Orcfax are described using
[Schema.org](https://schema.org) and [JSON-LD](https://json-ld.org/) compliant
taxonomies, which have been purposefully selected in order to enrich Orcfax
data. Additionally, by leveraging these taxonomies, Orcfax makes its outputs
[Linked Data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linked_data) and
[AI-training](https://www.telusinternational.com/insights/ai-data/article/how-to-train-ai)
compatible, which dramatically enhances downstream value.

JSON-LD is the most widely used serialization of the Resource Description
Framework (RDF); this framework ensures that data is machine-readable.
And schema.org is the single most impactful markup language for making any type
of metadata machine-readable. In Orcfax's case, that means metadata related to
[Claims](https://schema.org/Claim) made about events happening in the real
world.

The use of these taxonomies, and the highly structured data as aa result, will
perfectly position Orcfax feeds to serve as the source of a growing data lake of
real world fact statements that will have many secondary reference uses beyond
DeFi oracle publication.
