---
id: Data collection
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /data-collection
---

## Decentralizing data collectionâ€‹
Since the roll out of our ADA-USD / USD-ADA feed, Orcfax has committed to
educating users on the critical importance of rejecting data derived from single
sources and the necessity for source redundancy. Orcfax addresses both of these
and avoids single points of failure or attack by leveraging the scientific
principle of triangulation, which is concerned with the utilization of multiple
methods, or sources of information, in order to derive a comprehensive
understanding of phenomena; this principle also aids in testing the validity of
source information by providing the ability to compare the data across sources.
Orcfax has enshrined this principle in node development and how nodes collect
data.

Each Orcfax node is required to query, and receive data from a minimum of 3
primary sources. This principle of triangulation protects the reliability and
authenticity of oracle data. In practice, Orcfax node design uses the principle
of triangulation in order to enable nodes to function even in scenarios where
sources fail to return data, are compromised, or report anomalous data. In each
of these scenarios, the principle means that nodes remain flexible and resilient
given that they meet the threshold for minimum data sources (e.g. nodes query 5
sources, and receive inputs from 4 which meets and exceeds the 3 source
minimum), which enables the network to maintain data integrity and reliability
while being unaffected by outliers.

![Triangulation of primary sources](/img/2024-02--source-triangulation.jpg)

Our adherence to the triangulation policy allows a more thorough response to the
oracle problem by providing nodes the ability to compare data across multiple
sources which allows them to assess the authenticity and accuracy of the data.

## Leveraging decentralized data gathering on chain
The same data collection principles and standards used in Orcfax price feeds
will also be leveraged in Cardano Native token (CNT) feeds. Orcfax has chosen to
leverage DEX Liquidity pools in order to report token pair values. This is
because liquidity pools provide a unique and efficient price discovery
mechanism. Within the pool, a token pair derives comparative value according to
a simple mathematical formula that calculates price, in real time, as users
affect the token-to-token ratio by adding or removing from either side. Because
of this innate price discovery mechanism in liquidity pools, Orcfax now has the
ability to provide a simple and elegant solution for decentralized Cardano
Native Token feeds.

Regardless of the target tokens requested by integrators, Orcfax will leverage
its network of validator nodes to execute the collection process. Each node will
be responsible for querying the cardano ledger, in order to collect the total
liquidity per token pair on each DEX. These liquidity values are then calculated
through virtual liquidity pooling to derive an aggregated liquidity pool for
that token pair.

![Virtual liquidity pooling](/img/2024-02--virtual-liquidity-pooling.jpg)

This virtual pooling will then reflect the aggregated price of that token pair,
as observed by that specific node. This approach removes the risk of low
liquidity DEXes skewing the price to allow manipulation.

Each Orcfax node will perform the same process and share their derived values
with the rest of the validator network in order to normalize, validate
and finally publish on the Cardano blockchain. This data can then be used as
trustworthy reference inputs to trigger different kinds of business logic in
Cardano smart contracts and dApps.
