docs/orcfax-solution/solution-overview.md, before:

---
id: Solution overview
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /solution-overview
---

Orcfax is an oracle designed to publish trustworthy data to smart contracts on
the Cardano blockchain. The oracle’s architecture consists of a number of
software nodes written predominantly in Python, Haskell, and Plutus v2 code.
These Orcfax nodes publish datum about the real world
(e.g. the price of ADA in USD) a CBOR-serialized reference inputs into Cardano
transactions. These datum are read and used in business logic by smart contracts
and scripts.

The subject of this data can be nearly limitless in possibilities, and can
include changes in currency price pairs, supply-chain activity, insurance, as
well as data on-chain (e.g. the prices of Cardano native tokens or CNTs).

![Orcfax solution overview](/img/2023-07-06--Orcfax-concept-diagram.png)

Once published, this data can be used as trustworthy Reference Inputs to trigger
different kinds of business logic in Cardano smart contracts and dApps. All of
this data relating to Orcfax workflows (including collection, validation,
and publication) is captured within archival packages, which when combined
represent complete audit logs of Orcfax processes. These packages are secured
through decentralized storage and are made easily accessible through the
[Orcfax Explorer](https://explorer.orcfax.io/) dashboard.

More can be read about the dashboard in
[The Orcfax Explorer](auditability#the-orcfax-explorer).

<!--More about the Orcfax strategy for the long term preservation of its data
outputs can be read in [Decentralized storage](). -->

## Collection
Most leading oracle platforms are beginning to implement some form of
decentralized oracle pools as another technique to address the
[oracle problem](oracle-basics#what-is-the-oracle-problem).
In its purest form, a decentralized oracle pool uses distributed networking and
computation nodes to achieve consensus on the authenticity and accuracy of
source data before it is published on-chain.

Unfortunately, most current implementations do not go this far. Instead they
often receive data from a single, black box provider. They then use an oracle
pool to arrive at a consensus about the *uniformity* of that data and not
necessarily about its *authenticity* or *accuracy*.

To address this shortfall found in many other oracle services, Orcfax enforces
a strict source-data triangulation policy for all its oracle feeds. This means
that the Orcfax solution will collect data from a minimum of three independent
sources via a decentralized pool of validator nodes. These data points are then
validated, aggregated, normalized by the nodes before finally being published
within a Cardano blockchain transaction by leveraging its Plutus V2 eUTXO format
and the [CIPs](https://github.com/mlabs-haskell/cardano-open-oracle-protocol/blob/9e9c9aedba84d32e424b1dd116b4734e1a42f3bc/coop-docs/00-design.md#:~:text=Cardano%20features%20enabling%20Oracles) implemented in the Vasil
hard fork for reference inputs and inline datum.

More on this topic can be found in [Data collection](data-collection).

<!-- ## Validation
a short primer on the validation process...

More on this topic can be found in [Data validation](data-validation). -->

## COOP
The rules for how to structure and publish this data has been released as the
open-source Cardano Open Oracle Protocol ([COOP](https://github.com/mlabs-haskell/cardano-open-oracle-protocol/)) under an Apache 2.0 license. This protocol
allows Orcfax, and other publication services, to streamline their solutions
while also increasing cost efficiency. The COOP was designed as a purpose-built
set of software tools and processes to publish datum to the Cardano blockchain.

By making it freely available to developers, Orcfax has established the protocol
as one of many well-structured tools and schemas that will be provided to
community members in order to aid in viewing and consuming trustworthy off-chain
data in their smart contracts.

More on this topic can be found in [The Cardano Open Oracle Protocol](coop).

## Standards & best practice compliance
The Orcfax Team’s world class experience with information management
technologies and expertise in other related fields has informed solution
development at every stage. Orcfax is developing an oracle solution which we
believe will be the most comprehensive solution to the oracle problem. This will
be in part because it has been designed to be a standards-compliant
recordkeeping system that integrates on-chain publication with decentralized
data collection, validation, and archiving processes.

The Orcfax system requirements were meticulously derived from the extensive
analysis and review of blockchain, information technology, and legal standards
being utilized within the information management industry. The outputs of this
research are managed in a comprehensive requirements knowledge base from which
Orcfax has derived system requirements. In addition to these standards and best
practices, our team continually reviews existing oracle services in order to
maintain a comparative analysis of other oracle services and how those solutions
attempt to guarantee the accuracy and authenticity of their data.

Our analysis continues to reveal gaps both in how existing oracle providers
conceptualize the oracle problem, and in the efficacy of their attempts to
address it. These service providers have broadly ignored industry standards and
academic research findings that exist outside of the blockchain industry’s echo
chamber. Of particular significance are the ISO quality standards that provide
well-established international guidelines and practices for ensuring the
authenticity and accuracy of digital information– the very thing that oracles
should be most concerned with.

Orcfax stands apart from other oracle solutions because it has leveraged
relevant multidisciplinary assets in order to inform its development, from the
ground-up, as a standards-compliant, digital record-keeping system.

More on this topic can be found in [Auditability](auditability).

## Orcfax beyond DeFi
The oracle problem isn't a problem domain limited to scenarios regarding the
provision of data feeds to dApps in an effort to underpin the success of
*truly* decentralized finance. Society at large is experiencing a
"[trust crisis](https://medium.com/coinmonks/orcfax-the-trust-machine-revisited-c475dbb0a5d6)".
We need better solutions for validating statements of fact about the real
world.

Orcfax is responding to that call. Our solution is intentionally designed
to leverage the distributed consensus breakthroughs achieved through
distributed ledger technologies like blockchain in order to provide
decentralized, "trustless" fact validation and reference services; What's more,
the Orcfax solution has been intentionally designed to by leveraging global
record keeping, information management standards so that data created through
its processes will have many use cases and applications beyond DeFi. Our team
is particularly interested in on-demand, real-world fact validation to counter
the threat of AI-generated falsehoods.

Commit message:

addition of publication section in overview and fixed coop header

docs/orcfax-solution/solution-overview.md, after:

---
id: Solution overview
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /solution-overview
---

Orcfax is an oracle designed to publish trustworthy data to smart contracts on
the Cardano blockchain. The oracle’s architecture consists of a number of
software nodes written predominantly in Python, Haskell, and Plutus v2 code.
These Orcfax nodes publish datum about the real world
(e.g. the price of ADA in USD) a CBOR-serialized reference inputs into Cardano
transactions. These datum are read and used in business logic by smart contracts
and scripts.

The subject of this data can be nearly limitless in possibilities, and can
include changes in currency price pairs, supply-chain activity, insurance, as
well as data on-chain (e.g. the prices of Cardano native tokens or CNTs).

![Orcfax solution overview](/img/2023-07-06--Orcfax-concept-diagram.png)

Once published, this data can be used as trustworthy Reference Inputs to trigger
different kinds of business logic in Cardano smart contracts and dApps. All of
this data relating to Orcfax workflows (including collection, validation,
and publication) is captured within archival packages, which when combined
represent complete audit logs of Orcfax processes. These packages are secured
through decentralized storage and are made easily accessible through the
Orcfax Explorer [dashboard](https://explorer.orcfax.io/).

More can be read about the dashboard in
[The Orcfax Explorer](auditability#the-orcfax-explorer).

<!--More about the Orcfax strategy for the long term preservation of its data
outputs can be read in [Decentralized storage](). -->

## Collection
Most leading oracle platforms are beginning to implement some form of
decentralized oracle pools as another technique to address the
[oracle problem](oracle-basics#what-is-the-oracle-problem).
In its purest form, a decentralized oracle pool uses distributed networking and
computation nodes to achieve consensus on the authenticity and accuracy of
source data before it is published on-chain.

Unfortunately, most current implementations do not go this far. Instead they
often receive data from a single, black box provider. They then use an oracle
pool to arrive at a consensus about the *uniformity* of that data and not
necessarily about its *authenticity* or *accuracy*.

To address this shortfall found in many other oracle services, Orcfax enforces
a strict source-data triangulation policy for all its oracle feeds. This means
that the Orcfax solution will collect data from a minimum of three independent
sources via a decentralized pool of validator nodes. These data points are then
validated, aggregated, normalized by the nodes before finally being published
within a Cardano blockchain transaction by leveraging its Plutus V2 eUTXO format
and the [CIPs](https://github.com/mlabs-haskell/cardano-open-oracle-protocol/blob/9e9c9aedba84d32e424b1dd116b4734e1a42f3bc/coop-docs/00-design.md#:~:text=Cardano%20features%20enabling%20Oracles) implemented in the Vasil
hard fork for reference inputs and inline datum.

More on this topic can be found in [Data collection](data-collection).

<!-- ## Validation
a short primer on the validation process...

More on this topic can be found in [Data validation](data-validation). -->

## COOP
The rules for how to structure and publish this data has been released as the
open-source Cardano Open Oracle Protocol ([COOP](https://github.com/mlabs-haskell/cardano-open-oracle-protocol/)) under an Apache 2.0 license. This protocol
allows Orcfax, and other publication services, to streamline their solutions
while also increasing cost efficiency. The COOP was designed as a purpose-built
set of software tools and processes to publish datum to the Cardano blockchain.

By making it freely available to developers, Orcfax has established the protocol
as one of many well-structured tools and schemas that will be provided to
community members in order to aid in viewing and consuming trustworthy off-chain
data in their smart contracts.

More on this topic can be found in the [Cardano Open Oracle Protocol](coop).

## Publication
After the data has been collected, normalized, and validated, the next step is
to publish it on-chain; how publication is executed is largely dependant on the
business needs of Orcfax feed integrators and the use cases these feeds enable.

These use cases are wide ranging and innovation in the blockchain space means
that new use cases for Orcfax feeds continue to evolve. Because of this, there
often isn't a one size fits all solution for how to bring data on-chain. Orcfax
recognizes just how dynamic the development landscape is and continues to make
develop its in order to meet those changing needs.

Orcfax is developing publication options that allow integrators to choose
services that meet the needs of their projects. By adding flexibility to the
Orcfax solution, dApps can make business decisions that improve cost efficiency
and value to their stakeholders.

More on this topic can be found in [Publication models](publication-models).

## Standards & best practice compliance
The Orcfax Team’s world class experience with information management
technologies and expertise in other related fields has informed solution
development at every stage. Orcfax is developing an oracle solution which we
believe will be the most comprehensive solution to the oracle problem. This will
be in part because it has been designed to be a standards-compliant
recordkeeping system that integrates on-chain publication with decentralized
data collection, validation, and archiving processes.

The Orcfax system requirements were meticulously derived from the extensive
analysis and review of blockchain, information technology, and legal standards
being utilized within the information management industry. The outputs of this
research are managed in a comprehensive requirements knowledge base from which
Orcfax has derived system requirements. In addition to these standards and best
practices, our team continually reviews existing oracle services in order to
maintain a comparative analysis of other oracle services and how those solutions
attempt to guarantee the accuracy and authenticity of their data.

Our analysis continues to reveal gaps both in how existing oracle providers
conceptualize the oracle problem, and in the efficacy of their attempts to
address it. These service providers have broadly ignored industry standards and
academic research findings that exist outside of the blockchain industry’s echo
chamber. Of particular significance are the ISO quality standards that provide
well-established international guidelines and practices for ensuring the
authenticity and accuracy of digital information– the very thing that oracles
should be most concerned with.

Orcfax stands apart from other oracle solutions because it has leveraged
relevant multidisciplinary assets in order to inform its development, from the
ground-up, as a standards-compliant, digital record-keeping system.

More on this topic can be found in [Auditability](auditability).

## Orcfax beyond DeFi
The oracle problem isn't a problem domain limited to scenarios regarding the
provision of data feeds to dApps in an effort to underpin the success of
*truly* decentralized finance. Society at large is experiencing a
"[trust crisis](https://medium.com/coinmonks/orcfax-the-trust-machine-revisited-c475dbb0a5d6)".
We need better solutions for validating statements of fact about the real
world.

Orcfax is responding to that call. Our solution is intentionally designed
to leverage the distributed consensus breakthroughs achieved through
distributed ledger technologies like blockchain in order to provide
decentralized, "trustless" fact validation and reference services; What's more,
the Orcfax solution has been intentionally designed to by leveraging global
record keeping, information management standards so that data created through
its processes will have many use cases and applications beyond DeFi. Our team
is particularly interested in on-demand, real-world fact validation to counter
the threat of AI-generated falsehoods.
