docs/incentivized-testnet/phase-1-manual.md, before:

---
id: phase 1 manual
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /phase-1-manual
---

# Phase 1 manual

**More info to be provided as we approach this ITN phase.**

## Data collection for CEXes

During this phase, validators will begin decentralizing the collection function
of the Orcfax Network. Validators will initially run a limited suite of software
responsible for the collection of data from centralized exchanges which have
been identified as primary sources of information. Validators will then
participate in funneling that data to the Orcfax federated validator and
publisher.

### Hardware and infrastructure

During this phase of the ITN, the hardware requirements will be minimal to
handle the tasks involved. Participants should expect to meet the following
minimum requirements:

-   2GB of RAM
-   A single CPU

### Logging issues

ITN Phase 1 will use a GitHub repository to record issues. You can use this with
a GitHub account if you have one. You can also send issues to Orcfax via the
support channels in Discord; Orcfax will then transpose them to the GitHub
Issues for the benefit of the Orcfax community.

> NB
>
> The measurable participation of operators, including via GitHub, is one way in
> which the health of the Orcfax network will be made apparent to integrators,
> which will be critical to the network's ability to attract and generate
> revenue.

### Aliasing your signing key

TODO: ADD LINK HERE (or COPY FROM DOC INTO MARKDOWN)

### Software and setup

There are three components needed for Phase 1 of the ITN. You will need the
latest versions of each.

-   [collector-node][collector-1]
-   [cex collector (gofer)][collector-2]
-   [cer-feeds.json][collector-3]

> KEEPING UP TO DATE:
>
> There needs to be some flexibility in the versions of software being run on a
> decentralized network. That being said, Orcfax will coordinate with ITN
> participants to provide them the most up to date information about maintaining
> their setup and if versions can or need to be upgraded. This page will also be
> added to as required.

[collector-1]: https://github.com/orcfax/collector-node/releases
[collector-2]: https://github.com/orcfax/oracle-suite/releases
[collector-3]:
    https://raw.githubusercontent.com/orcfax/cer-feeds/refs/tags/2024.10.30.0001/feeds/mainnet/cer-feeds.json

#### Collector node

The latest release of the collector node needs to be installed in a Python
virtual environment and will be configured to run via cron.

#### Installing in a virtual environment

Assume we download the Python Wheel (\*.whl)
`collector_node-2.0.0a11-py3-none-any.whl`. The software can be installed with:

```sh
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
python -m pip install collector_node-2.0.0a11-py3-none-any.whl
```

> STAYING INFORMED:
>
> Take the time to look through the different repositories and their README
> files to fully understand the software you're running as part of the Orcfax
> Network.

#### CEX collector (gofer)

Gofer was originally published by [Chronicle-Labs][chronicle-1] and has been
modified to publish data according to Orcfax's data standard.

There are multiple releases available, it is likely you will want the
`gofer_0.4.0_Linux_x86_64` release. When you download this you will need to give
it executable permissions, i.e. `chmod +x /path/to/gofer`.

[chronicle-1]: https://chroniclelabs.org/

##### node-identity.json

A node-identity file will need to be created. The quickest way to do this is to
run gofer standalone:

```sh
./gofer data ADA/USD -o orcfax
```

> NB. you can prettify this data using tools such as [jq][jq-1], e.g. with the
> command:

```sh
./gofer data ADA/USD -o orcfax | jq
```

[jq-1]: https://jqlang.github.io/jq/

The identity file will be output to `/tmp/.node-identity.json` and will be
referenced in the cron job described below.

#### cer-feeds.json

`cer-feeds.json` is used by Orcfax to coordinate publication. It contains a list
of CEX and DEX feeds that we publish. DEX publication will not be triggered in
Phase 1.

### Signing key

Information has been provided about the signing key and signing key aliasing
protocol, for completeness, you should create your signing key as follows:

<!--markdownlint-disable-->

1. Create verification and signing key pair

```sh
cardano-cli address key-gen \
 --verification-key-file payment.vkey \
 --signing-key-file payment.skey
```

2. Create address

```sh
cardano-cli address build \
 --payment-verification-key-file payment.vkey \
 --out-file payment.addr \
 --mainnet
```

3. Calculate the verification key hash

```sh
cardano-cli address key-hash \
  --payment-verification-key-file payment.vkey \
  --out-file payment.hash
```

<!--markdownlint-enable-->

You will use a path to your payment.skey in the cron job described below.

### Directory layout

There are different ways to organize the collector code. Orcfax uses a number of
directories internally, e.g. for the collector, gofer, and signing-key.

```text
├── collector
│   └── venv
├── gofer/
    └── gofer
├── signing-key
    └── payment.skey
```

These could all be in one directory, e.g.

```text
.orcfax
└── collector
    ├── gofer
    ├── payment.skey
    └── venv
```

And they will be pointed at in the cron job described below. The contents of the
payment.hash file will be used to alias the wallet in which you hold the Orcfax
Validator License.

### Cron

Cron is used to schedule collection. The collector uses a number of environment
variables, and can be configured inside the cron runner. Cron is configured to
ask for data every minute. The config look as follows:

<!--markdownlint-disable-->

```cron
ORCFAX_VALIDATOR=
NODE_IDENTITY_LOC=
NODE_SIGNING_KEY=
GOFER=

* * * * * /path/to/collector-node --feeds /path/to/cer-feeds.json 2>&1 | logger -t orcfax_collector
```

An example that assumes an user called `orcfax` with a virtual environment
configured to run the Python-based code:

```cron
ORCFAX_VALIDATOR=wss://itn.0.orcfax.io/ws/node
NODE_IDENTITY_LOC=/tmp/.node-identity.json
NODE_SIGNING_KEY=/home/orcfax/signing-key/payment.skey
GOFER=/home/orcfax/gofer/gofer

* * * * * /home/orcfax/collector/venv/bin/collector-node --feeds /home/orcfax/collector/cer-feeds.json 2>&1 | logger -t orcfax_collector
```

<!--markdownlint-enable-->

Commit message:

Replace aliasing TODO with correct link

docs/incentivized-testnet/phase-1-manual.md, after:

---
id: phase 1 manual
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /phase-1-manual
---

# Phase 1 manual

**More info to be provided as we approach this ITN phase.**

## Data collection for CEXes

During this phase, validators will begin decentralizing the collection function
of the Orcfax Network. Validators will initially run a limited suite of software
responsible for the collection of data from centralized exchanges which have
been identified as primary sources of information. Validators will then
participate in funneling that data to the Orcfax federated validator and
publisher.

### Hardware and infrastructure

During this phase of the ITN, the hardware requirements will be minimal to
handle the tasks involved. Participants should expect to meet the following
minimum requirements:

-   2GB of RAM
-   A single CPU

### Logging issues

ITN Phase 1 will use a GitHub repository to record issues. You can use this with
a GitHub account if you have one. You can also send issues to Orcfax via the
support channels in Discord; Orcfax will then transpose them to the GitHub
Issues for the benefit of the Orcfax community.

> NB
>
> The measurable participation of operators, including via GitHub, is one way in
> which the health of the Orcfax network will be made apparent to integrators,
> which will be critical to the network's ability to attract and generate
> revenue.

### Aliasing your signing key

You will need to alias your signing key as described [here][alias-1].

[alias-1]: signing-key-aliasing

### Software and setup

There are three components needed for Phase 1 of the ITN. You will need the
latest versions of each.

-   [collector-node][collector-1]
-   [cex collector (gofer)][collector-2]
-   [cer-feeds.json][collector-3]

> KEEPING UP TO DATE:
>
> There needs to be some flexibility in the versions of software being run on a
> decentralized network. That being said, Orcfax will coordinate with ITN
> participants to provide them the most up to date information about maintaining
> their setup and if versions can or need to be upgraded. This page will also be
> added to as required.

[collector-1]: https://github.com/orcfax/collector-node/releases
[collector-2]: https://github.com/orcfax/oracle-suite/releases
[collector-3]:
    https://raw.githubusercontent.com/orcfax/cer-feeds/refs/tags/2024.10.30.0001/feeds/mainnet/cer-feeds.json

#### Collector node

The latest release of the collector node needs to be installed in a Python
virtual environment and will be configured to run via cron.

#### Installing in a virtual environment

Assume we download the Python Wheel (\*.whl)
`collector_node-2.0.0a11-py3-none-any.whl`. The software can be installed with:

```sh
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
python -m pip install collector_node-2.0.0a11-py3-none-any.whl
```

> STAYING INFORMED:
>
> Take the time to look through the different repositories and their README
> files to fully understand the software you're running as part of the Orcfax
> Network.

#### CEX collector (gofer)

Gofer was originally published by [Chronicle-Labs][chronicle-1] and has been
modified to publish data according to Orcfax's data standard.

There are multiple releases available, it is likely you will want the
`gofer_0.4.0_Linux_x86_64` release. When you download this you will need to give
it executable permissions, i.e. `chmod +x /path/to/gofer`.

[chronicle-1]: https://chroniclelabs.org/

##### node-identity.json

A node-identity file will need to be created. The quickest way to do this is to
run gofer standalone:

```sh
./gofer data ADA/USD -o orcfax
```

> NB. you can prettify this data using tools such as [jq][jq-1], e.g. with the
> command:

```sh
./gofer data ADA/USD -o orcfax | jq
```

[jq-1]: https://jqlang.github.io/jq/

The identity file will be output to `/tmp/.node-identity.json` and will be
referenced in the cron job described below.

#### cer-feeds.json

`cer-feeds.json` is used by Orcfax to coordinate publication. It contains a list
of CEX and DEX feeds that we publish. DEX publication will not be triggered in
Phase 1.

### Signing key

Information has been provided about the signing key and signing key aliasing
protocol, for completeness, you should create your signing key as follows:

<!--markdownlint-disable-->

1. Create verification and signing key pair

```sh
cardano-cli address key-gen \
 --verification-key-file payment.vkey \
 --signing-key-file payment.skey
```

2. Create address

```sh
cardano-cli address build \
 --payment-verification-key-file payment.vkey \
 --out-file payment.addr \
 --mainnet
```

3. Calculate the verification key hash

```sh
cardano-cli address key-hash \
  --payment-verification-key-file payment.vkey \
  --out-file payment.hash
```

<!--markdownlint-enable-->

You will use a path to your payment.skey in the cron job described below.

### Directory layout

There are different ways to organize the collector code. Orcfax uses a number of
directories internally, e.g. for the collector, gofer, and signing-key.

```text
├── collector
│   └── venv
├── gofer/
    └── gofer
├── signing-key
    └── payment.skey
```

These could all be in one directory, e.g.

```text
.orcfax
└── collector
    ├── gofer
    ├── payment.skey
    └── venv
```

And they will be pointed at in the cron job described below. The contents of the
payment.hash file will be used to alias the wallet in which you hold the Orcfax
Validator License.

### Cron

Cron is used to schedule collection. The collector uses a number of environment
variables, and can be configured inside the cron runner. Cron is configured to
ask for data every minute. The config look as follows:

<!--markdownlint-disable-->

```cron
ORCFAX_VALIDATOR=
NODE_IDENTITY_LOC=
NODE_SIGNING_KEY=
GOFER=

* * * * * /path/to/collector-node --feeds /path/to/cer-feeds.json 2>&1 | logger -t orcfax_collector
```

An example that assumes an user called `orcfax` with a virtual environment
configured to run the Python-based code:

```cron
ORCFAX_VALIDATOR=wss://itn.0.orcfax.io/ws/node
NODE_IDENTITY_LOC=/tmp/.node-identity.json
NODE_SIGNING_KEY=/home/orcfax/signing-key/payment.skey
GOFER=/home/orcfax/gofer/gofer

* * * * * /home/orcfax/collector/venv/bin/collector-node --feeds /home/orcfax/collector/cer-feeds.json 2>&1 | logger -t orcfax_collector
```

<!--markdownlint-enable-->
