docs/developer-manual/consume.md, before:

---
id: consume
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /consume
---

# Consuming Orcfax Statements

This document aims to explain how dApp developers (i.e. integrators) can
integrate Orcfax feeds into their dApp with all the technical details included.

## Overview

### Orcfax

Orcfax is a Cardano native oracle platform.

Orcfax is organized into feeds. Generally a feed concerns time series data, such
as the exchange rate from ADA to USD. A feed is a data pipeline that specifies
how data is sourced, processed, and the format of its outputs.

<!-- FIXME : See the orcfax explorer for more details on the feeds available and
their definitions. -->

One part of the overall protocol is getting the data on-chain to be consumable
by dApps and their end users. The part of a feed's output that ends up on-chain
is called a **statement**. A statement is included in the datum of a transaction
input, and thus available to dApps via the reference input field.

### Orcfax-publish

The part of the overall protocol getting the data on-chain is called
**Orcfax-publish**. Orcfax-publish consists of three Plutus V2 scripts:

1. FactStatement (FS)
2. FactStatementPointer (FSP)
3. Constitution (C)

The FS script is the main script. It can be employed in both Mint and Spend
purposes. It can mint only a single asset class we call FS token. An FS token
can only exist at the FS script address (staking credentials are irrelevant
here).

The presence of an FS token in a UTXO verifies that the associated statement is
authentic.

Both the FSP and C scripts are simple updatable state scripts. That is, they
allow a UTXO at the script address to hold a validity token and a piece of state
(in the datum). When required, a twinned auth token is used to spend this UTXO
and output another with the same validity token and a new state.

In the case of the FSP, the state is simply the FS script hash. Orcfax reserves
the ability to update the FS script should business or developmental needs
require (e.g. in order to migrate to Plutus V3), and the FS script allows Orcfax
to do this without impacting integrators. By first finding the FSP in the
reference inputs of a script context, a validator can recognize the correct FS
script hash.

The C script represents the Constitution. It holds the current valid pubkey that
is permitted to sign statements. The FS script checks that every statement
published has a valid signature with respect to this pubkey. The Constitution is
not utilized by integrators, and plays no further part in this document.

## Examples

[Orcfax-examples][orcfax-examples] contains simple demo dApps that illustrate
how to integrate Orcfax oracle feeds. It also contains helpers for creating your
own mock Orcfax-publish to facilitate testing.

[orcfax-examples]: https://github.com/orcfax/orcfax-examples

## Details

### Steps

To integrate an orcfax statement safely in a plutus script, the script must
perform the following steps:

1. Verify FSP UTXO from reference inputs. Extract FS script hash from inline
   datum.
2. Verify FS UTXO. Extract the inline datum and parse as a bytearray. The value
   is the FS script hash, which determines the FS token.
3. From reference inputs, find the input(s) containing an FS token. These are
   the FS inputs.
4. For each FS input, extract the inline datum and parse. The datum will be of
   type `FsDat<t>` (described below).
5. Extract the statement from the datum.
6. Verify that the statement's `feed_id` is the one required for the
   integration.
7. Verify that the statement's `created_at` timestamp is within the timeframe
   established by your specific business rules.

### Verify FSP UTXO

The FSP script hash must first be ascertained from a given deployment (Example
deployments listed below). This will provide the policy ID part of an FSP asset
class.

The FSP UTXO will contain the FSP script token. The FSP script token has the
following token name (expressed in base 16/ hex):

```aiken
fsp_script=#"000de140"
```

This is derived from `cip-67` script NFT label.

### Extract FS script hash

All datums are inlined, including that of the FSP state. The FSP datum is
simply:

```aiken
pub type FspDat = ByteArray
```

The value is the FS script hash. When Orcfax upgrades the Orcfax-publish
protocol, the value of the datum will be updated to reflect the new FS script,
while the FSP script will remain the same.

### Verify FS UTXOs

An FS UTXO must contain an FS token. The FS token is the only asset class of the
FS script, and has token name of the empty bytearray.

:::info[N.B.]

Integrators must verify an FS UTXO via an FS token. Anyone can put a UTXO at the
FS script address with any data they like.

:::

### Coercing FS data

An FS UTXO will have an inlined datum. The datum datatype is a parameterized
datatype and is expressed in aiken lang as follows:

```aiken
pub type Datum<t> {
  statement : Statement<t>,
  context : Context
}

/// Used by consumers
pub type Statement<t> {
  feed_id : ByteArray,
  created_at : Int,
  body : t,
}

/// Used by orcfax validator
pub type Context {
  collect_after : Int, // Slot number
  collector : ByteArray, // Pkh
}
```

:::note

Only the statement part of the datum is relevant to integrators. The `Context`
part can be treated simply as `Data`.

:::

### Verifying the feed ID

Integrators must verify the feed ID is as expected.

Integrators should establish the expected feed ID from Orcfax documentation on
the feed definition. The feed ID is a human readable label and decomposes as:

```sample
<feed_type>/<feed_name>
```

Warning: Orcfax reserves the possibility to use a `versioned_feed_id` as the
value in the statement. A versioned feed ID has the following form:

```sample
<feed_type>/<feed_name>/<feed_version>
```

For this reason integrators must check that the `feed_id` value begins with the
expected bytes, rather than assume that there is equality.

### Verifying the created at

Generally a dApp will require the ability to ascertain **when** a statement was
deemed true. For example, that the statement represents the ADA-USD exchange
rate in the last hour, not simply at some previous point in time.

The "right" way to handle time is down to the business logic and the
integrator's needs.

One way integrators might choose to do this is as follows:

1. Verify that the validity range of the transaction is 'short' (say ~1h).
2. Check that the value of `created_at` falls within the bounds of this validity
   range.

### Coercing the body

<!-- The datatype of the body can be found in the feed definition page. -->

For feeds of type current exchange rate (CER), the body is:

```aiken
pub type Rational {
  num: Int,
  denom: Int,
}
```

## Notes

In the case that an integrator is expecting only one type of body within
statements, we can simplify the types. For example, for CER feeds the types
become:

```aiken
type RationalStatement {
  feed_id : ByteArray,
  created_at: Int,
  body : Rational,
}

type RationalDatum {
  statement : RationalStatement,
  _context : Data
}
```

## Example datum

Some example hex encoded CBOR:

```sample
D87982D879834E4345522F464143542D4144412F331B0000019012C8CCD3D879821981951A000F4
240D879821B0000019012C90F89581C694F647F6C6FEE725EAF731938613059AC560E573D9FA656
0850EAB0
```

Which can be deserialized as:

```cbor
121([
  121([
    "CER/FACT-ADA/3",
    1718302067923,
    121([
      33173,
      1000000
    ])
    ]),
  121([
    1718302085001,
    h'694F647F6C6FEE725EAF731938613059AC560E573D9FA6560850EAB0'
  ])
])
```

## Deployments

| Network | Link                 | FSP hash                                                   |
| ------- | -------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| preview | [cexplorer.io][prev] | `0690081bc113f74e04640ea78a87d88abbd2f18831c44c4064524230` |
| preprod | n/a                  |                                                            |
| mainnet | [cexplorer.io][main] | `8793893b5dda6a513ba63c80e9d7b2d4f108060c11979bfc7d863ff0` |

[prev]:
    https://preview.cexplorer.io/script/0690081bc113f74e04640ea78a87d88abbd2f18831c44c4064524230
[main]:
    https://cexplorer.io/policy/8793893b5dda6a513ba63c80e9d7b2d4f108060c11979bfc7d863ff0

Commit message:

Its important that users include trailing slash (#54)
This is not clear enough in the docs.

Co-authored-by: waalge <waagle@jes>

docs/developer-manual/consume.md, after:

---
id: consume
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /consume
---

# Consuming Orcfax Statements

This document aims to explain how dApp developers (i.e. integrators) can
integrate Orcfax feeds into their dApp with all the technical details included.

## Overview

### Orcfax

Orcfax is a Cardano native oracle platform.

Orcfax is organized into feeds. Generally a feed concerns time series data, such
as the exchange rate from ADA to USD. A feed is a data pipeline that specifies
how data is sourced, processed, and the format of its outputs.

<!-- FIXME : See the orcfax explorer for more details on the feeds available and
their definitions. -->

One part of the overall protocol is getting the data on-chain to be consumable
by dApps and their end users. The part of a feed's output that ends up on-chain
is called a **statement**. A statement is included in the datum of a transaction
input, and thus available to dApps via the reference input field.

### Orcfax-publish

The part of the overall protocol getting the data on-chain is called
**Orcfax-publish**. Orcfax-publish consists of three Plutus V2 scripts:

1. FactStatement (FS)
2. FactStatementPointer (FSP)
3. Constitution (C)

The FS script is the main script. It can be employed in both Mint and Spend
purposes. It can mint only a single asset class we call FS token. An FS token
can only exist at the FS script address (staking credentials are irrelevant
here).

The presence of an FS token in a UTXO verifies that the associated statement is
authentic.

Both the FSP and C scripts are simple updatable state scripts. That is, they
allow a UTXO at the script address to hold a validity token and a piece of state
(in the datum). When required, a twinned auth token is used to spend this UTXO
and output another with the same validity token and a new state.

In the case of the FSP, the state is simply the FS script hash. Orcfax reserves
the ability to update the FS script should business or developmental needs
require (e.g. in order to migrate to Plutus V3), and the FS script allows Orcfax
to do this without impacting integrators. By first finding the FSP in the
reference inputs of a script context, a validator can recognize the correct FS
script hash.

The C script represents the Constitution. It holds the current valid pubkey that
is permitted to sign statements. The FS script checks that every statement
published has a valid signature with respect to this pubkey. The Constitution is
not utilized by integrators, and plays no further part in this document.

## Examples

[Orcfax-examples][orcfax-examples] contains simple demo dApps that illustrate
how to integrate Orcfax oracle feeds. It also contains helpers for creating your
own mock Orcfax-publish to facilitate testing.

[orcfax-examples]: https://github.com/orcfax/orcfax-examples

## Details

### Steps

To integrate an orcfax statement safely in a plutus script, the script must
perform the following steps:

1. Verify FSP UTXO from reference inputs. Extract FS script hash from inline
   datum.
2. Verify FS UTXO. Extract the inline datum and parse as a bytearray. The value
   is the FS script hash, which determines the FS token.
3. From reference inputs, find the input(s) containing an FS token. These are
   the FS inputs.
4. For each FS input, extract the inline datum and parse. The datum will be of
   type `FsDat<t>` (described below).
5. Extract the statement from the datum.
6. Verify that the statement's `feed_id` is the one required for the
   integration.
7. Verify that the statement's `created_at` timestamp is within the timeframe
   established by your specific business rules.

### Verify FSP UTXO

The FSP script hash must first be ascertained from a given deployment (Example
deployments listed below). This will provide the policy ID part of an FSP asset
class.

The FSP UTXO will contain the FSP script token. The FSP script token has the
following token name (expressed in base 16/ hex):

```aiken
fsp_script=#"000de140"
```

This is derived from `cip-67` script NFT label.

### Extract FS script hash

All datums are inlined, including that of the FSP state. The FSP datum is
simply:

```aiken
pub type FspDat = ByteArray
```

The value is the FS script hash. When Orcfax upgrades the Orcfax-publish
protocol, the value of the datum will be updated to reflect the new FS script,
while the FSP script will remain the same.

### Verify FS UTXOs

An FS UTXO must contain an FS token. The FS token is the only asset class of the
FS script, and has token name of the empty bytearray.

:::info[N.B.]

Integrators must verify an FS UTXO via an FS token. Anyone can put a UTXO at the
FS script address with any data they like.

:::

### Coercing FS data

An FS UTXO will have an inlined datum. The datum datatype is a parameterized
datatype and is expressed in aiken lang as follows:

```aiken
pub type Datum<t> {
  statement : Statement<t>,
  context : Context
}

/// Used by consumers
pub type Statement<t> {
  feed_id : ByteArray,
  created_at : Int,
  body : t,
}

/// Used by orcfax validator
pub type Context {
  collect_after : Int, // Slot number
  collector : ByteArray, // Pkh
}
```

:::note

Only the statement part of the datum is relevant to integrators. The `Context`
part can be treated simply as `Data`.

:::

### Verifying the feed ID

Integrators must verify the feed ID is as expected.

Integrators should establish the expected feed ID from Orcfax documentation on
the feed definition. The feed ID is a human readable label and decomposes as:

```sample
<feed_type>/<feed_name>/
```

Warning: Orcfax reserves the possibility to use a `versioned_feed_id` as the
value in the statement. A versioned feed ID has the following form:

```sample
<feed_type>/<feed_name>/<feed_version>
```

For this reason integrators must check that the `feed_id` value begins with the
expected bytes, rather than assume that there is equality. Its also important to
include the trailing `/` after the feed name. Including the slash prevents, say,
a `ADA-USDM` being used when only `ADA-USD` is desired.

### Verifying the created at

Generally a dApp will require the ability to ascertain **when** a statement was
deemed true. For example, that the statement represents the ADA-USD exchange
rate in the last hour, not simply at some previous point in time.

The "right" way to handle time is down to the business logic and the
integrator's needs.

One way integrators might choose to do this is as follows:

1. Verify that the validity range of the transaction is 'short' (say ~1h).
2. Check that the value of `created_at` falls within the bounds of this validity
   range.

### Coercing the body

<!-- The datatype of the body can be found in the feed definition page. -->

For feeds of type current exchange rate (CER), the body is:

```aiken
pub type Rational {
  num: Int,
  denom: Int,
}
```

## Notes

In the case that an integrator is expecting only one type of body within
statements, we can simplify the types. For example, for CER feeds the types
become:

```aiken
type RationalStatement {
  feed_id : ByteArray,
  created_at: Int,
  body : Rational,
}

type RationalDatum {
  statement : RationalStatement,
  _context : Data
}
```

## Example datum

Some example hex encoded CBOR:

```sample
D87982D879834E4345522F464143542D4144412F331B0000019012C8CCD3D879821981951A000F4
240D879821B0000019012C90F89581C694F647F6C6FEE725EAF731938613059AC560E573D9FA656
0850EAB0
```

Which can be deserialized as:

```cbor
121([
  121([
    "CER/FACT-ADA/3",
    1718302067923,
    121([
      33173,
      1000000
    ])
    ]),
  121([
    1718302085001,
    h'694F647F6C6FEE725EAF731938613059AC560E573D9FA6560850EAB0'
  ])
])
```

## Deployments

| Network | Link                 | FSP hash                                                   |
| ------- | -------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| preview | [cexplorer.io][prev] | `0690081bc113f74e04640ea78a87d88abbd2f18831c44c4064524230` |
| preprod | n/a                  |                                                            |
| mainnet | [cexplorer.io][main] | `8793893b5dda6a513ba63c80e9d7b2d4f108060c11979bfc7d863ff0` |

[prev]:
    https://preview.cexplorer.io/script/0690081bc113f74e04640ea78a87d88abbd2f18831c44c4064524230
[main]:
    https://cexplorer.io/policy/8793893b5dda6a513ba63c80e9d7b2d4f108060c11979bfc7d863ff0
