---
id: terms of service
sidebar_position: 5
slug: /terms-of-service
---

# Terms of service

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD036 -->

Valid from: _August 1, 2024_

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

These Terms of Service, together with any documents and additional terms they
incorporate by reference (collectively, these "Terms"), are entered into between
Orcfax Ltd. ("Orcfax", "we," "us," and "our"), a legal entity registered as a
corporation in the British Virgin Islands and you or the company or other legal
entity that you represent ("you" or "your").

Please read these Terms carefully as they govern your use of the data that we
(1) publish inline to transactions on the Cardano blockchain ("Oracle data"),
(2) data that we archive to the Arweave network ("Archival data") (3) or data
that we publish to the pages and files located at the Internet domain Orcfax.io
(the "Website") and its subdomains such as explorer.orcfax.io or docs.orcfax.io.

## THE SERVICES

Collectively, the Oracle data collected, calculated, processed, and published by
Orcfax to transactions on the Cardano blockchain; along with the related
Archival data and files that Orcfax archives to the Arweave network; as well as
the data and information published to the Website (including any and all
sub-domain sites such as the Orcfax Explorer and Docs sites) are hereby referred
to, collectively, as the "Services" provided by Orcfax.

Orcfax makes no representations regarding the validation process or its
effectiveness

## REVISION OF TERMS OF SERVICE

We reserve the right, in our sole discretion, to modify these Terms from time to
time. If we make changes, we will provide you with notice of such changes using
Commercially Reasonable Means, which is defined as taking the desired
notification action without a material increase in costs incurred by Orcfax and
the competitive environment in which such action occurs. Examples of such notice
include providing a notice through the Website or updating the date at the top
of these Terms. Unless otherwise stated, any modifications are effective
immediately, and your continued use of Orcfax's Services will confirm your
acceptance of the changes. If you do not agree to the amended Terms, you must
stop using our Services.

## YOUR AGREEMENT TO THESE TERMS OF SERVICE

These Terms describe your rights and obligations in relation to the Services and
our disclaimers and limitations of legal liability for the Services. By
accessing or using any part of Orcfax's Oracle data, Archival data or Website
data you agree to become bound by these Terms of Service.

If you use the Services on behalf of a company, organization (including a
decentralized autonomous organization or "DAO") or other entity, or if you are
an automated agent acting on behalf of another entity (including "bots" that
execute actions using artificial intelligence or other technologies for
autonomous decision-making, such as "smart contracts"), then "you" includes you
and that entity. You represent and warrant that (a) you are an authorized
representative of the entity with the authority and agency to bind the entity to
these Terms, and (b) you agree to these Terms on the entity's behalf.

You must not use any of our Services, if you do not agree to these Terms or if
you do not have the authority or agency to bind the entity, on whose behalf you
are using the Services, to these Terms.

## YOUR REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES; CONDITIONS

Our Services enable access to data from multiple and varied sources. You
acknowledge and agree that the accuracy, availability and quality of data
collected and calculated via our Services may be impacted by various factors,
including as a result of the underlying data being volatile or otherwise
compromised at the data source, which could include malfeasance or malpractice.

Some of our Services require holding and paying Distributed Ledger Technology
(DLT) tokens (also known as "crypto-currency") including ADA and FACT. You
hereby represent and warrant that you: (1) have the necessary technical
expertise and ability to review and evaluate the security, integrity and
operation of any tokens that you decide to acquire, sell or use as a result of
using our Services (2) you have the knowledge, experience, understanding,
professional advice and information to make your own evaluation of the merits,
risks and applicable compliance requirements, under Applicable Law, of any ADA
or FACT tokens that are used as inputs or outputs to Orcfax Services; and (3)
know, understand and accept the financial risks associated with your use of
Orcfax Services and any tokens that are used as inputs or outputs to deliver the
Services; (4) you are not located in, or a resident or national of, any
jurisdiction where access to or use of the Services would be contrary to
Applicable Law, including any embargoed or sanctioned countries (e.g., as
designated by the U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control or similar authorities),
and you will comply with all export control and sanctions laws.

If you are an individual, you represent that you are at least 18 years old (or
the age of majority in your jurisdiction) and have the legal capacity to enter
into these Terms.

## Intellectual Property

Orcfax retains all right, title, and interest in the Services, including all
intellectual property rights therein. Subject to these Terms, Orcfax grants you
a limited, non-exclusive, non-transferable, revocable license to access and use
the Services for your internal purposes only. You agree not to reverse-engineer,
decompile, or create derivative works from the Services. Orcfax makes no
representations that the Services do not infringe third-party rights.

## INDEMNIFICATION

You will defend, indemnify, and hold harmless Orcfax, our directors, officers,
employees, attorneys, agents, representatives, suppliers, licensors and
contractors, including those persons and entities operating software that
contributes Oracle data to Orcfax (collectively, the "Protected Parties" or
individually a "Protected Party") from (1) any claim, demand, lawsuit, action,
proceeding, investigation, liability, damage, loss, cost or expense, including
without limitation reasonable attorneys' fees, arising out of or relating to
your use of, or conduct in connection with, Orcfax's Services, including our
Oracle data, Archival data, the Website, ADA and FACT tokens associated with our
or your Distributed Ledger Technology Address; (2) your violation of these
terms; (3) your violation of Applicable Law or regulations; (4) any claims made
by or against the Protected Parties by you or other members of the organization
or entity on whose behalf you may be using the Website or Services; (5) or your
infringement or misappropriation of the rights of any other person or entity. If
you are obligated to indemnify any Protected Party, Orcfax (or, at its
discretion, the applicable Protected Party) will have the right, in its sole
discretion, to control any action or proceeding and to determine whether Orcfax
wishes to settle, and if so, on what terms.

## CHANGES; SUSPENSION; OR TERMINATION OF SERVICES

Orcfax may, at our sole discretion, from time to time and with or without prior
notice to you, modify, suspend or disable, temporarily or permanently, our
offered Services, in whole or in part, for any reason whatsoever, including, but
not limited to, as a result of demands and preferences communicated by users of
our Services, a security incident, your violation of these Terms or, in the
Orcfax's good faith judgment, such changes, suspension or termination as are
necessary for the protection of our Services.

## DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY

To the maximum extent permitted under Applicable Law, the Services (including
any of their content or functionality) is provided by or on behalf of Orcfax on
an "AS IS" and "AS AVAILABLE" basis. WE EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM, AND YOU HEREBY
WAIVE, ANY REPRESENTATION, CONDITIONS, OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, WHETHER
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, LEGAL, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, OR ARISING FROM STATUTE,
OTHERWISE IN LAW, COURSE OF DEALING, OR USAGE OF TRADE, INCLUDING WITHOUT
LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED OR LEGAL WARRANTIES AND CONDITIONS OF MERCHANTABILITY,
MERCHANTABLE QUALITY, QUALITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE,
SECURITY, AVAILABILITY, RELIABILITY, ACCURACY, QUIET ENJOYMENT AND
NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.

Applicable Law is defined to mean all applicable provisions of constitutions,
laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, treaties, policies, regulations, permits,
licenses, approvals, interpretations and orders of court or government
authorities and all orders and decrees of all courts and arbitrators.

Furthermore, ORCFAX IS NOT LIABLE FOR ANY LOSSES SUFFERED BY YOU RESULTING FROM
ANY SUSPENSION, TERMINATION, OR MODIFICATION TO OUR SERVICES OR YOUR LOSS OF
ACCESS TO ALL OR A PORTION OF OUR SERVICES, FOR ANY REASON.

Without limiting the foregoing, we do not represent or warrant that Services
(including any Oracle data, Archival data, Website data or related data) will be
uninterrupted, available at any particular time or error-free. Further, WE DO
NOT WARRANT THAT ERRORS IN THE SERVICES ARE CORRECTABLE OR WILL BE CORRECTED.

In no event will Orcfax, together with any Protected Party, be liable for any
incidental, indirect, special, punitive, exemplary, consequential or similar
damages... whether under contract, tort (including negligence), strict
liability, statute, equity or other theory of liability, even if Orcfax and/or
related parties have been advised of the possibility of such damages.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Orcfax's total liability for any direct damages
arising out of or related to these Terms or the Services shall not exceed one
hundred United States Dollars (US$100).

All of these terms will survive any termination of your access to the Services,
regardless of the reasons for its expiration or termination, in addition to any
other provision which by law or by its nature should survive.

## EXCLUSION OF CONSEQUENTIAL AND RELATED DAMAGES

In no event will Orcfax, together with any Protected Party, be liable for any
incidental, indirect, special, punitive, exemplary, consequential or similar
damages or liabilities whatsoever (including, without limitation, damages for
loss of data, information, revenue, goodwill, profits or other business or
financial benefit) arising out of or in connection with Orcfax Services
(including any and all of its data and functionality), any execution or
settlement of a transaction, any performance or non-performance of the Services,
your Distributed Ledger Technology assets, other digital assets (including FACT
and ADA tokens) or any other product, service or other item provided by or on
behalf of a Protected Party, whether under contract, tort (including
negligence), civil liability, statute, strict liability, breach of warranties,
or under any other theory of liability, and whether or not any Protected Party
has been advised of, knew of or should have known of the possibility of such
damages and notwithstanding any failure of the essential purpose of these Terms
or any limited remedy NOR IS ORCFAX IN ANY WAY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EXECUTION OR
SETTLEMENT OF TRANSACTIONS BETWEEN USERS OF ORCFAX SERVICES AND ANY OTHER
SERVICES OR SOFTWARE.

## GOVERNING LAW

These Terms shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of
the British Virgin Islands, without regard to its conflict of law principles.
Any dispute arising out of or relating to these Terms or the Services shall be
resolved exclusively through binding arbitration in the British Virgin Islands
under the rules of [e.g., the International Chamber of Commerce], and you waive any
right to participate in class actions or representative proceedings. Judgment on
the award may be entered in any court having jurisdiction." This channels disputes
to a favorable, low-cost forum and waives class actions to limit mass claims.

## Miscellaneous

Force Majeure: Orcfax shall not be liable for any failure to perform due to
causes beyond its reasonable control, including acts of God, war, terrorism,
embargoes, riots, floods, earthquakes, strikes, supply chain shortages, power
failures, or blockchain network disruptions. Severability: If any provision of
these Terms is held invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions shall
remain in full force. Entire Agreement: These Terms constitute the entire
agreement between you and Orcfax regarding the Services and supersede all prior
agreements.
