---
id: tokenomics
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /tokenomics
---

# FACT tokenomics

The FACT [utility token](utility-token) has a fixed supply of 1 billion tokens.

The FACT token minting policy ID is
[a3931691f5c4e65d01c429e473d0dd24c51afdb6daf88e632a6c1e51][policyid-1].

The FACT token is tradeable on [Cardano DEX markets][dex-1]. It is listed on
coin tracking sites like [CoinGecko][listing-1] and [CoinMarketCap][listing-2].

[policyid-1]: https://pool.pm/asset1kuwfd0esf9xcxurp2x4f9w65lvz4tkfw5epugq
[listing-1]: https://www.coingecko.com/en/coins/orcfax
[listing-2]: https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/orcfax/
[dex-1]: https://www.taptools.io/charts/token?pairID=026a18d04a0c642759bb3d83b12e3344894e5c1c7b2aeb1a2113a570.2b4e632bf755fe5e33309a47216aa396106641edd056423e2ef2a08ce30bb604

## Token distribution

Following the token generation event (TGE), the Orcfax team distributed all
1,000,000,000 $FACT to a series of [ADA Handle][handle-1] wallets. Each of these
adahandle wallets represents one of the allocations as mentioned in the chart
below.

![FACT tokenomics pie chart](/img/2023-08-30--FACT-tokenomics-pie-chart.jpeg)

To further understand these allocations, each will be defined, with their
purpose and use expanded on; the following list of ADA Handle wallets correspond
to the allocations in the $FACT tokenomics pie chart above. The ability for
users to monitor the use of these ADA handles, combined with the wallets' strict
parameters for use, provides a unique method of accountability which the Orcfax
project hopes to foster. This is accomplished by ensuring a high level of
transparency in the distribution and use of $FACT as any member of the Cardano
community can monitor activity within these wallets.

![FACT ADA handle wallets](/img/2023-09-01--ADAhandle-FACT-wallets.png)

As mentioned previously, each of the nine $FACT allocations has rules governing
how and when their supply of $FACT can be utilized. The vesting schedule
provided in table above clearly presents the total $FACT allocation for each
ADA Handle, the cliff date, and when that supply is made available to the
allocation.

![FACT tokenomics table](/img/2023-09-02--FACT-tokenomics-table.png)

[handle-1]: https://mint.handle.me/

## Validator rewards

The biggest allocation is reserved to reward our decentralized validators for
running Orcfax nodes.

500,000,000 (50%) $FACT have been allocated for rewarding Orcfax validator node
operators for collecting, normalizing, validating, publishing and archiving
real-world data for consumption as eUTXO datum by Cardano dApps and smart
contracts.

This allocation is meant to subsidize operations long enough for the network to
become self-sustaining based on fee collection. This allocation is a serious
signal that Orcfax understands that a healthy validator network is required for
the long-term viability and value of the network.

This allocation does not have a cliff date or vesting schedule. How it is paid
out to validators will be made public after the close of the Orcfax Incentivized
Testnet.

## Promotional airdrops

10,000,000 (1%) $FACT have been allocated for raising awareness for our project
and to promote Orcfax. This will be done by utilizing the allocated tokens by
way of $FACT airdrops and giveaways. The project will also leverage this
allocation in various public relations campaigns going forward.

This allocation has a cliff date of 3 months after the start of the ISPO and a 6
month vesting period (i.e. after 3 months, distributed monthly for 6 months).

## Team

150,000,000 (15%) $FACT have been allocated for disbursement among the founding
team; this allocation will be distributed to the founder and team members in
order to compensate them for their significant investments, both in time and
effort to launch the Orcfax Network.

This allocation has a cliff date of 3 months after the start of the ISPO and a
24 month vesting period.

## Advisors

10,000,000 (1%) $FACT have been allocated for external advisors that provide
guidance and support to the Orcfax project with specialized expertise. These
advisors will be compensated in $FACT from this allocation.

This allocation has a cliff date of 3 months after the start of the ISPO and a
24 month vesting period.

## Ecosystem

50,000,000 (5%) $FACT have been allocated for developing future partnerships,
marketing campaigns, developer grants, funding research, and for tools that
contribute to the project's overall ecosystem.

This allocation has a cliff date of 6 months after the start of the ISPO and a 6
month vesting period.

## Launchpad & LP Bootstrapping

Orcfax used the [Wingriders Launchpad][launch-1] to introduce the FACT token to
the open market and make it available for circulation. this was done to raise
funds for continued project development via a decentralized and non-custodial
process. Decentralized, non-custodial, and fair price discovery were critical
aspects of the Orcfax launch. This is why we refrained from utilizing a
centralized initial coin offering (ICO) style public sale. By doing so, we
empowered the market to set the token's initial price, avoiding pre-determined
prices, promotes decentralization strategies, and provided an opportunity for
the initial bootstrapping of a liquidity pool. Additionally, this approach also
enhances regulatory clarity and minimizes future risks.

86,000,000 (8.6%) $FACT was allocated as collateral for ADA contributed by
Launchpad participants. 24,000,000 (2.4%) was allocated for bootstrapping the
first liquidity pool on the Wingriders DEX which followed the launchpad.

The 86,000,000 Launchpad $FACT have no cliff and/or vesting restrictions. They
can be claimed in full as soon as the launchpad closes.

Orcfax is committed to increasing the footprint of its community. The way we
decided to distribute the Orcfax utility token is an important step towards
achieving this goal. That's why we decided not to sell any FACT tokens via VC,
seed, or private sale rounds. We believe this has resulted in a more fair
distribution of our token among our community.

[launch-1]: https://medium.com/@orcfax/orcfax-token-launch-in-collaboration-with-wingriders-launchpad-39d63da2b379

## Token foundation

50,000,000 (5%) $FACT have been allocated for use in developing and the
subsequent launch of the Orcfax DAO. The allocation will also be utilized to
seed the initial treasury, which will be used by the Orcfax DAO foundation to
fund ongoing activities.

This allocation has a cliff date of 12 months after the start of the ISPO and a
6 month vesting period.

## ISPO

100,000,000 (10%) $FACT were allocated for use in the Orcfax Initial Stake Pool
Offering (ISPO). An ISPO is a mechanism popular within the Cardano blockchain
community. The basic principle is that ADA delegators forgo their ADA staking
rewards each epoch in return for a proportionate share of a project's token.

The Orcfax ISPO started on March 15th 2023, within Cardano's
[400th epoch][ispo-1]. The Orcfax [reflection](/files/2023-07-07--Orcfax-ISPO-reflection.pdf) on the process was made
available to the public on July 7th, 2023.

As the ISPO approached its saturation point in epoch 405, Orcfax closed the pool
for new delegators, and the ISPO came to a close in epoch 413. The speed at
which the Orcfax ISPO reached saturation, and came to a successful close, made
it one of Cardano's most successful ISPOs at that time.

The Orcfax ISPO was the first and only way for our early supporters to acquire
$FACT by delegating ADA to our ISPO pool.

The cliff date for the first ISPO drops was September 2023, with 10% of the
total $FACT supply allocated to ISPO participants. This allocation had a cliff
date of 6 months after the start of the ISPO and a 6 month vesting period.

[ispo-1]: https://orcfax.io/assets/Orcfax-ISPO-Prospectus--March15-2023.pdf

## Yield Farming APY

20,000,000 (2%) FACT tokens were used to enhance the appeal of our liquidity
pool(s) by offering substantial yield farming rewards to our liquidity
providers.

Yield farming, also called liquidity mining, involves lending or staking
cryptocurrencies in DeFi platforms to earn extra tokens. Instead of letting
tokens sit idle in their wallets, users can deposit tokens in DeFi platforms
like WingRiders, or Minswap. In return, users receive (native) tokens or other
fees as rewards. Rewards vary based on factors like asset type, amount,
duration, and platform demand.

The tokens received by users as a reward for their staked $FACT have no cliff
and/or vesting restrictions.

### Disclaimer

Orcfax does not offer financial advice. The information provided above is for
educational and informational purposes only. Yield farming involves financial
risks, and individuals should carefully consider their own financial situation,
risk tolerance, and investment goals before participating in any yield farming
program.
