---
id: oracle_basics
sidebar_position: 10
slug: /oracle-basics
---

# [ARCHIVED] Oracle basics

## 4. Where is the market value?

While our competitors in the Cardano ecosystem have struggled to find projects
to integrate their feeds, there is absolutely no shortage of projects that need
oracle feeds; this disparity is a direct result of customers having difficulty
with the technical architecture choices, pricing model, and off-chain
co-coordination requirements implemented by our competition.

In contrast, Orcfax has been approached by several projects looking to integrate
our feeds. We are currently in private, active conversations with at least 10
high profile Cardano projects; while we will not be announcing "partnerships",
We are lining up a number of feed-consumer announcements which we will announce
over the coming months.

## 5. What partnerships has Orcfax Announced?

Orcfax will not be announcing "partnerships". These kinds of relationships run
counter to how we conceptualize decentralization; partnerships require trust
where we should be designing trustlessnesss. To that end, we don't want nor will
we require data consumers to sign any kind of off-chain deal to use our feeds.
Instead, over the next 3 months we will begin announcing the projects and
platforms that have approached the Orcfax team to become Orcfax fact statement
consumers.

## 6. What does Orcfax bring to Cardano?

Orcfax is the most comprehensive solution to the oracle problem. This is because
the project was designed to be a standards-compliant record-keeping system that
integrates on-chain publication with decentralized data collection, validation,
and archiving. Orcfax's system requirements were derived from an extensive
analysis of blockchain, IT, and legal standards which are managed in a
comprehensive requirements knowledge-base.

We have also reviewed existing oracle services and completed a comparative
analysis of how facts are proven to be authentic and accurate in disciplines
such as law, historiography, and philosophy. First-generation oracle providers
have mostly ignored industry standards and academic research findings that exist
outside of the blockchain industry echo chamber. In particular, ISO quality
standards that provide well-established international guidelines and practices
for ensuring the authenticity and accuracy of digital information have been
especially ignored. And this is the very thing that oracles should be most
concerned with. Orcfax stands apart from all other attempts to solve the oracle
problem because it has been designed from the ground-up to be a
standards-compliant, digital record-keeping system.

## 7. How is the Orcfax data catalog added to and maintained?

At present, Orcfax Ltd. decides which new fact statement types to collect,
validate, and publish as feeds. We are in close discussions with potential
consumers of our data feeds to understand their needs while also leveraging
competitive intelligence in order to identify innovative new oracle feed
products to bring to the Cardano ecosystem.

The governance of the network, including decisions on which feeds to host (or
retire) will be transferred to the Orcfax DAO at a later stage. Once a feed is
added, each Orcfax node in the decentralized oracle pool gets a software upgrade
that now enables their node to collect data from new data sources, normalize it,
and pass it around the oracle pool for validation.
