---
id: orcfax_architecture
sidebar_position: 20
slug: /orcfax-architecture
---

# [ARCHIVED] Orcfax architecture


## 2. What advantages does Orcfax have over competition?

We believe that Orcfax offers several advantages over other oracle solutions. For one, the Cardano Open Oracle Protocol, which we developed with the help of [mlabs](https://mlabs.city/), is an elegant solution to oracle publication on Cardano and promotes a financial sustainability model.

There are many other differences on top of that, especially on how we source and validate data as well as our focus on archiving authentic audit trails of all the data and metadata generated by a fact publication workflow[^1].

## 3. Where can I learn more about the Orcfax Testnet & how to participate?

We haven't started yet but we will open our testnet to participants in Q2. The goal is to keep hardware requirements and technical know-how to a minimum in order to ensure widespread implementation and a larger network of Orcfax nodes. Our team is currently developing a strategy for deploying our Orcfax data collection and validation nodes as certified binaries which will make install and updates more efficient.

We also have plans for a "plug-and-play" preload and hardware package which we hope to release in 2024. These devices would come with upgradeable Orcfax node software pre-installed.

For those interested in this next exciting step for Orcfax and the Cardano community, please stay tuned here. We will give plenty of notice about our Incentivized Testnet here in Discord and will open a channel for participants when at launch.

## 4. Will I need to purchase a license to run an Orcfax node?

No. Node operators will be required to stake $FACT in order to participate.

## 5. How much $FACT will be needed per node?

The exact amount of $FACT that a node operator is required to stake has not been determined yet. However, our goal is to keep the $FACT staking amount relatively low in order to promote equitable opportunities for potential node operators. Additionally, there will be no advantage to staking more than the minimum requirement. Neither will having more than the minimum staked affect your chances of winning the boost reward in each publication event or increase your proportional share of the pool reward. These decisions have been made in and effort to positively affect mass-adoption.

## 6. What are the technical requirements to run a node?

In the same way that we aim to improve adoption by lowering the staking threshold for potential node operators, we are also working to keep the technical requirements as light as possible. With that said, we have not released official minimum specs yet. We will make sure our community has plenty of notice on how to participate as node operators in our Incentivized Testnet, so stay tuned.

## 7. How can the community nominate new data feeds?

we are developing this process with the aim to make feed nomination as simple as possible for our community members, because we believe that its critical that the cardano community actively participate in expanding the use cases of the Orcfax technology. One of our priorities during this development is ease of use.

Community members will be able to submit code PRs that implement new data feed types which are COOP compliant and Orcfax compatible. More in depth documentation, including instructions, will be provided to our community as our incentivized testnet progresses.

## 8. Is there an optimal number of nodes?

The bare minimum number of nodes for the Orcfax decentralized validator pool is 5. However, our goal is to have thousands of nodes across the globe. Keeping the technical specs and staking requirements to run a node as lean as possible will be key for this.

## 9. Which projects has Orcfax partnered with?

We are working closely with the technical and managerial teams of several projects to integrate our Orcfax feeds with exciting and innovative products. Keep an eye on our socials for more formal announcements soon.

## 10. Where can I find the Orcfax team page?

At any one time, the core Orcfax team includes 5-10 staff and contractors. We believe a truly decentralized and permissionless project shouldn't be evaluated based on a very long team list. We've seen enough of that without it being a true indicator of project quality/status. The running code and its open-source codebase, along with its immutable features should be what is getting evaluated. For now, our founder and Peter Van Garderen is the human face behind Orcfax. He has the proven professional qualifications to achieve our project objectives. This includes making Peter obsolete and ensuring Orcfax runs as a fully autonomous network governed by a fully Decentralized Autonomous Organization.

## 11. Will Orcfax be governed by a DAO?

The Orcfax team is committed to radical decentralization and has structured the project accordingly, with the explicit intention of ensuring a 100% hand-off of governance and all aspects of the project to a DAO.

The Orcfax team will continue to actively engage in Cardano community governance dialogues and model good project behavior in our progression towards full decentralization. Our team shares the personal and professional philosophy that, in the end, our primary objective in this movement is to decentralize power. The Orcfax oracle is just one piece of necessary plumbing infrastructure to facilitate that progression.

With that said, the decentralization of a project, its community, and technology stack-- especially one as sophisticated as the Orcfax oracle platform-- is not a simple feat and nearly impossible to do correctly from day one. Therefore, we are on a path of gradual decentralization. We will continue to participate in Cardano community discussions about governance to develop our long-game roadmap and milestones towards 100% decentralized, autonomous governance. The likeliest and earliest time for that to happen is by year three, with five years being our maximum threshold deadline for this switch.

## 12. Can I contribute code?

Absolutely! Our team comes from an open source development background so we'll be implementing good software engineering practices, including facilitating PRs, code reviews. build pipelines, etc.

In the short term, we will rely on the Cardano community to help us identify key areas where Orcfax can create new Adapters for different feed types. This will also be a great way to leverage community contributions in the form of PRs. We are cautiously implementing a loosely coupled architecture with Adapters as first class primitives and will then provide transparent documentation on how to design and develop new feed type adapters in order to enable new oracle driven use cases on Cardano.

We will leverage Git for this process as this revolutionary decentralized technology gives us the ability to accomplished everything outlined above; it provides a method for software development and transparent documentation while also giving our active community base a clear processes for asking critical question, contributing new insights, and submitting PRs to help kick the ball up the field.

In the long term, the Orcfax whitepaper (*coming soon*) lays out the Orcfax goal for a transition to [DAO](https://docs.orcfax.io/orcfax-architecture#6-will-orcfax-be-governed-by-a-dao) governance. A big DAO responsibility will be assigning maintenance and development contracts to any qualified parties. Because we, at every step, have baked in good software maintenance and deployment practices from day one, this transition towards a DAO, its division of labour, and scaling strategy have the best chance of success.

## 13. How long has this project been in development?

We have been working on the Orcfax solution since Fall of 2021.


[^1]: Additional information can be found in project [Solution](https://docs.orcfax.io/solution). Please also check our [Prospectus](https://orcfax.io/assets/Orcfax-ISPO-Prospectus--March15-2023.pdf) To see how we are separating ourselves from other oracle solutions.
