docs/Feeds/CER/CEX/fact-statement-datum.md, before:

---
id: cex-2
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /fact-statement-datum
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import factStatementDatum from '!!raw-loader!/schema/cer/cex/fact-statement-datum.json';

# Fact Statement Datum

A place for Orcfax to describe the types/properties relevant to a
`fact-statement-datum.json`.

Orcfax utilizes the following Schema.org types and properties in its Fact
Statement Datum records. The description provided by [Schema.org][schema-1]
follows each unless Orcfax maintains a more nuanced understanding-- in these
cases, the description will be *italicized*. If the term appears in its own
definition, it will be replaced when possible with a \[synonym\] in order to aid
understanding.

## Schema.org Types

| Type     | Description                                                   |
| ------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------|
| [`Message`][type-1] | *Information from a sender to one or more entities*.|
| [`Organization`][type-2] | An \[entity\] such as a school, NGO, corporation, club, etc.|

[schema-1]: https://schema.org/
[type-1]: https://schema.org/Message
[type-2]: https://schema.org/Organization

## Schema.org Properties

| Property     | Type     | Description                                                   |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------|
| [`dateCreated`][prop-1] | Message     | The date on which the `CreativeWork` was created or the item was added to a DataFeed.|
| [`encoding`][prop-2] | Message     | A media object that encodes this `CreativeWork`.|
| [`identifier`][prop-3] | Message     | Used to represent any kind of identifier for any kind of Thing, such as ISBNs, GTIN codes, UUIDs etc.|
| [`messageAttachment`][prop-4] | Message     | A `CreativeWork` attached to the message.|
| [`name`][prop-5] | Message, Organization     | The name of the item.|
| [`publisher`][prop-6] | Message     | *The entity responsible for making a resource available, but not necessarily its authorship*.|
| [`text`][prop-7] | Message     | The textual content of this `CreativeWork`.|
| [`url`][prop-8] | Organization     | The uniform resource locator of the item.|

[prop-1]: https://schema.org/dateCreated
[prop-2]: https://schema.org/encoding
[prop-3]: https://schema.org/identifier
[prop-4]: https://schema.org/messageAttachment
[prop-5]: https://schema.org/name
[prop-6]: https://schema.org/publisher
[prop-7]: https://schema.org/text
[prop-8]: https://schema.org/url

## Fact Statement Datum example

<CodeBlock language="jsx">{factStatementDatum}</CodeBlock>

<a target="_blank" href="/schema/cer/cex/fact-statement-datum.json" download="fact-statement-datum.json">Download</a>

Commit message:

additional column for Orcfaxc defs

docs/Feeds/CER/CEX/fact-statement-datum.md, after:

---
id: cex-2
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /fact-statement-datum
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import factStatementDatum from '!!raw-loader!/schema/cer/cex/fact-statement-datum.json';

# Fact Statement Datum

A place for Orcfax to describe the types/properties relevant to a
`fact-statement-datum.json`.

Orcfax utilizes the following Schema.org types and properties in its Fact
Statement Datum records. The description provided by [Schema.org][schema-1]
follows each; if Orcfax maintains a more nuanced understanding, an additional
definition will be provided. If the term appears in its own definition, it will
be replaced when possible with a \[synonym\] in order to aid understanding.

## Schema.org Types

| Type     | Schema.org description     | Orcfax description     |
| -------- | ---------------------------| ---------------------- |
| [`Message`][type-1] | A single message from a sender to one or more organizations or people. | Information from a sender to one or more entities.|
| [`Organization`][type-2] | An \[entity\] such as a school, NGO, corporation, club, etc.|  |

[schema-1]: https://schema.org/
[type-1]: https://schema.org/Message
[type-2]: https://schema.org/Organization

## Schema.org Properties

| Property     | Type     | Schema.org description     | Orcfax definition     |
| ------------ | -------- | ---------------------------| --------------------- |
| [`dateCreated`][prop-1] | Message     | The date on which the `CreativeWork` was created or the item was added to a DataFeed.|  |
| [`encoding`][prop-2] | Message     | A media object that encodes this `CreativeWork`.|  |
| [`identifier`][prop-3] | Message     | Used to represent any kind of identifier for any kind of Thing, such as ISBNs, GTIN codes, UUIDs etc.|  |
| [`messageAttachment`][prop-4] | Message     | A `CreativeWork` attached to the message.|  |
| [`name`][prop-5] | Message, Organization     | The name of the item.|  |
| [`publisher`][prop-6] | Message     | The publisher of the creative work.| The entity responsible for making a resource available, but not necessarily its authorship. |
| [`text`][prop-7] | Message     | The textual content of this `CreativeWork`.|  |
| [`url`][prop-8] | Organization     | The uniform resource locator of the item.|  |

[prop-1]: https://schema.org/dateCreated
[prop-2]: https://schema.org/encoding
[prop-3]: https://schema.org/identifier
[prop-4]: https://schema.org/messageAttachment
[prop-5]: https://schema.org/name
[prop-6]: https://schema.org/publisher
[prop-7]: https://schema.org/text
[prop-8]: https://schema.org/url

## Fact Statement Datum example

<CodeBlock language="jsx">{factStatementDatum}</CodeBlock>

<a target="_blank" href="/schema/cer/cex/fact-statement-datum.json" download="fact-statement-datum.json">Download</a>
