docs/project-catalyst/f12-staking.md, before:

---
id: f12 staking
sidebar_position: 4
slug: /f12-staking
---

# Orcfax staking: rewarding good behaviour

R&D into Orxfax Network staking funded through the Catalyst F12 campaign.

This page will provide documentation pertaining to the execution of the proposal
and links to each of the deliverables required for their respective Milestones.
The full Catalyst proposal can be found [here][cat-1].

[cat-1]:
    https://projectcatalyst.io/funds/12/f12-cardano-use-cases-concept/orcfax-staking-rewarding-good-behaviour

## Problem statement

Game theory remains under-utilized within Cardano. As we progress to full
decentralization, Cardano dApps need more tools and protocols to incentivize
desired behaviour while mitigating bad actors.

### Proposed solution

Orcfax will research staking mechanisms for Web3 networks, design an
architecture stack of relevant tools and protocols, and develop a proof of
concept for testing in our validator network.

## Milestone 1

Orcfax produced a research report which evaluated current Web3 staking protocols
and tools available to Cardano projects With the hope that the exercise would
inform proof-of-concept development in subsequent milestones.

Orcfax conducted research over a sample set of staking protocols with a limited
initial understanding of the staking protocol landscape with the hope that the
exercise would inform future development by Orcfax.

This research and its findings are made available in _A Comparative Analysis of
Staking Protocols used in Blockchain Networks_ [(Wallis &
Koch, 2024)][staking-paper]

[staking-paper]: ./wallis-koch--2024--a-comparative-analysis-staking.md

## Milestone 2

Orcfax will produce the following:

-   Economic model report
-   Use case descriptions
-   Network architecture diagrams

## Milestone 3

Orcfax will produce software code that demonstrates how a validator node
operator can:

-   deposit testFACT stake
-   receive testFACT rewards
-   have testFACT slashed for non-conformant behaviour

## Final Milestone

Commit message:

adds milestone2 content to staking & consensus and the economic model md

docs/project-catalyst/f12-staking.md, after:

---
id: f12 staking
sidebar_position: 4
slug: /f12-staking
---

# Orcfax staking: rewarding good behaviour

R&D into Orxfax Network staking funded through the Catalyst F12 campaign.

This page will provide documentation pertaining to the execution of the proposal
and links to each of the deliverables required for their respective Milestones.
The full Catalyst proposal can be found [here][cat-1].

[cat-1]:
    https://projectcatalyst.io/funds/12/f12-cardano-use-cases-concept/orcfax-staking-rewarding-good-behaviour

## Problem statement

Game theory remains under-utilized within Cardano. As we progress to full
decentralization, Cardano dApps need more tools and protocols to incentivize
desired behaviour while mitigating bad actors.

### Proposed solution

Orcfax will research staking mechanisms for Web3 networks, design an
architecture stack of relevant tools and protocols, and develop a proof of
concept for testing in our validator network.

## Milestone 1

Orcfax produced a research report which evaluated current Web3 staking protocols
and tools available to Cardano projects With the hope that the exercise would
inform proof-of-concept development in subsequent milestones.

Orcfax conducted research over a sample set of staking protocols with a limited
initial understanding of the staking protocol landscape with the hope that the
exercise would inform future development by Orcfax.

This research and its findings are made available in _A Comparative Analysis of
Staking Protocols used in Blockchain Networks_ [(Wallis &
Koch, 2024)][staking-paper]

[staking-paper]: ./wallis-koch--2024--a-comparative-analysis-staking.md

## Milestone 2

After the successful completion of milestone 1 and its research objectives, work
on the staking PoC can begin; however, a number of considerations must be be
assessed which are quite impactful on design. Some of these consideration are
economical.

As Orcfax prepares to for milestone 3 which will conclude with the completion of
a staking PoC, we have documented the economic considerations and their
relationship to our other proposal (i.e. implementing a consensus mechanism);
our findings are made available [here][m2-1] along with a use case description,
and diagrams where appropriate.

[m2-1]: ./f12-economic-model.md

## Milestone 3

Orcfax will produce software code that demonstrates how a validator node
operator can:

-   deposit testFACT stake
-   receive testFACT rewards
-   have testFACT slashed for non-conformant behaviour

## Final Milestone
