docs/intro.md, before:

---
id: Introduction
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /
---

# Introduction

Orcfax is a decentralized [oracle][oracle-1] service designed to publish data
about real world events to the [Cardano][cardano-1] blockchain. Orcfax data is
made available to on-chain [smart contracts][smart-1] in Cardano's eUTXO native
format using the Orcfax Protocol.

Orcfax collects and validates facts about the real world using multiple
redundant nodes that are run as a decentralized network. Just as importantly,
Orcfax archives standards-compliant audit log packages for the entire oracle
publication workflow. This allows Orcfax users to "trust but verify" that Orcfax
is delivering authentic and accurate data.

The Orcfax solution has launched by offering current exchange rate feeds but
will expand to report on diverse types of other real-world facts as oracle use
cases, and their importance beyond blockchain domains, becomes more important to
society at large.

[oracle-1]: oracle-basics#what-is-a-blockchain-oracle
[cardano-1]: https://medium.com/coinmonks/why-cardano-in-2023-b481846028bc
[smart-1]: oracle-basics#what-is-a-smart-contract

## Getting started

Check our developer manual for instructions on how to:

1.  [Consume Orcfax data](consume): Get your Cardano dApps, smart contracts, and
    scripts consuming data from Orcfax oracle feeds.

1.  [Verify Orcfax data](verify): Using our unique auditing and archiving
    features, you can verify the authenticity and accuracy of every fact
    statement published by Orcfax, including its source data and validation
    history.

## Learn more

The [Solution Overview](solution-overview) section provides a high level
description of the Orcfax technical architecture and its primary components.

Learn more about the [tokenomics](tokenomics) and [utility](utility-token) of
the Orcfax service's native FACT token.

Read our [FAQ](oracle-basics) sections to answer any further questions you may
have about Orcfax or oracles in general.

You can subscribe to our content on [Medium][med-1] to stay up to date on new
developments and join our [Discord][Discord-1] to engage directly with Orcfax
team members.

[med-1]: https://medium.com/@orcfax
[Discord-1]: https://dsc.gg/orcfax

Commit message:

Network status (#61)
* update introduction page to mention our RSS feed

* add "Stay updated" header to intro page

* update husky prepare script and run npm audit fix for vulnerabilities

* update package-lock.json

* Create dependabot.yml

* format dependabot

---------

Co-authored-by: Ross Spencer <all.along.the.watchtower2001@gmail.com>

docs/intro.md, after:

---
id: Introduction
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /
---

# Introduction

Orcfax is a decentralized [oracle][oracle-1] service designed to publish data
about real world events to the [Cardano][cardano-1] blockchain. Orcfax data is
made available to on-chain [smart contracts][smart-1] in Cardano's eUTXO native
format using the Orcfax Protocol.

Orcfax collects and validates facts about the real world using multiple
redundant nodes that are run as a decentralized network. Just as importantly,
Orcfax archives standards-compliant audit log packages for the entire oracle
publication workflow. This allows Orcfax users to "trust but verify" that Orcfax
is delivering authentic and accurate data.

The Orcfax solution has launched by offering current exchange rate feeds but
will expand to report on diverse types of other real-world facts as oracle use
cases, and their importance beyond blockchain domains, becomes more important to
society at large.

[oracle-1]: oracle-basics#what-is-a-blockchain-oracle
[cardano-1]: https://medium.com/coinmonks/why-cardano-in-2023-b481846028bc
[smart-1]: oracle-basics#what-is-a-smart-contract

## Getting started

Check our developer manual for instructions on how to:

1.  [Consume Orcfax data](consume): Get your Cardano dApps, smart contracts, and
    scripts consuming data from Orcfax oracle feeds.

1.  [Verify Orcfax data](verify): Using our unique auditing and archiving
    features, you can verify the authenticity and accuracy of every fact
    statement published by Orcfax, including its source data and validation
    history.

## Learn more

The [Solution Overview](solution-overview) section provides a high level
description of the Orcfax technical architecture and its primary components.

Learn more about the [tokenomics](tokenomics) and [utility](utility-token) of
the Orcfax service's native FACT token.

Read our [FAQ](oracle-basics) sections to answer any further questions you may
have about Orcfax or oracles in general.

## Stay updated

-   Follow our [Medium][med-1] for project and community updates
-   Subscribe to our [RSS Feed][rss-1] for important network status alerts
-   Join our [Discord][Discord-1] to engage directly with the team and community

[med-1]: https://medium.com/@orcfax
[Discord-1]: https://dsc.gg/orcfax
[rss-1]: https://status.orcfax.com/rss.xml
